I: Introduction
The Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), currently being negotiated between the EU and US, aims to provide companies on either side of the ocean better access to markets on the other by removing trade barriers and reducing costs associated with differing regulatory standards. That negotiations, which began in 2013, have yet to be concluded only hints at how momentous an undertaking this partnership is: it would, if successful, create the largest free trade zone in the world, as the European and American markets together account for 54% of global output and 40% of global consumption. This, combined with the fact that the TTIP – in contrast to traditional free trade agreements (FTAs), which have historically focused on reducing tariffs and import quotas – is concerned primarily with non-tariff barriers, suggests it will become the template for the next generation of trade agreements. 
Debate over the TTIP’s desirability, however, has been fierce on both sides of the Atlantic. Proponents extol the incredible economic gains that could result from eliminating transaction costs burdening trade between the two regions, which the Centre for Economic and Policy Research has found could be as high as €119 billion and €95 billion annually for the EU and US, respectively. Critics, condemning the TTIP as merely disguising a vehicle through which transnational corporations hope to circumvent established regulatory regimes, hold that such claims are dramatic exaggerations, thrown around to garner support for a corporate-driven neoliberal agenda. That the TTIP will likely need to be ratified by each of the Member States might allay some of their fears, as it would give each nation the right to veto the final agreement, but it also means that, if ratified, the TTIP would likely encroach on domestic regulation in significant ways, perhaps giving cause for their alarm. 
Whatever the case, one certainty is that ratification would have tremendous implications for regulatory regimes on both sides of the ocean. In exploring those implications, this paper will focus specifically on the mechanisms proposed for achieving regulatory cooperation and enforcing investors’ rights to determine whether, and in what ways, these instruments could affect domestic regulation, concluding that ratification of the TTIP in its current form would likely lead to the advancement of a deregulation agenda within EU Member States.
Because negotiations over the TTIP are ongoing, and because of the veil of secrecy behind which they are being conducted, the exact terms of the agreement can not be known for sure. By now, however, enough information has been released, whether intentionally or not, to provide a general picture of what the final agreement might look like. What follows is a brief discussion of the goals the negotiators hope to achieve and the means they have proposed thus far for accomplishing them.
What sets the TTIP apart from most previous FTAs is that it hopes to tackle the non-tariff barriers to trade posed by regulatory differences between the markets. Because regulations vary between the EU and US, businesses must expend resources either modifying their product for sales abroad or jumping through legal hoops to satisfy foreign administrators, yet these regulations often achieve the same goals, differing only in their technical details and verification procedures. There are several mechanisms through which the TTIP seeks to achieve regulatory convergence, thus removing those transaction costs: mutual recognition, which calls for regulators on either side to recognize the rules established by their counterparts on the other; harmonization, which involves changing regulations on both sides to bring them closer to internationally accepted standards; and regulatory cooperation, which asks regulators on both sides to cooperate with one another in establishing new standards. 
Furthermore, both parties intend for the TTIP to be a “living agreement,” necessitating the establishment of institutions and practices that will ensure regulatory cooperation into the future. The most important of these institutions is the Regulatory Cooperation Council (RCC), as it would likely be given authority to create new homogenous standards, binding on both markets even without additional approval. The potential for this regulatory cooperation to affect domestic regulation will be evaluated in Section II.
	The TTIP’s other goal, providing companies better access to markets on either side of the ocean, is more straightforward because traditional barriers to trade between the EU and US are already quite low – tariffs between the two, for example, average only 4% – and because both parties have already had extensive experience negotiating FTAs of this kind. Nevertheless, the sheer size of these markets mean that even marginal improvements could yield significant benefits, so the parties hope to further reduce barriers by bringing tariffs and import quotas even lower, allowing free competition for government procurement purchases without preference being given to domestic firms, and establishing enforceable protections for prospective investors. Of these measures, the last, which would likely involve an Investor-State Dispute Settlement (ISDS) provision, has sparked the most vocal opposition. Section III will discuss the role of ISDS, generally and within the TTIP, and assess the merit behind claims that it would prevent Member States from properly exercising their regulatory authority.
II: Regulatory Cooperation	
While many fear the TTIP will serve as a back door for a corporate-friendly deregulation agenda, the European Commission (EC) has maintained its position that the agreement will not have any substantive effect on regulatory standards, save for when cooperation results in more effective regulation by both parties. This section, however, will contrast the EC’s reassurances, on the one hand, with the way the EU’s official position conflates regulatory convergence with deregulation, on the other, to show that ratification of the TTIP would likely result in a realignment of domestic regulatory policy with a pro-business deregulation agenda.
A. The Position of the European Commission
In a paper released last month, the EC reiterated its position that the TTIP would not result in lower regulatory standards, making the point that different regulations do not necessarily translate into different levels of protection, as such differences are frequently technical or procedural in nature and do not reflect political choices. An often used example is divergent car safety standards: both the EU and US have made the political choice that vehicles must provide a minimum level of safety to be street-legal and agree for the most part on what that level of safety is, yet the regulations differ in details such as how the test dummies must be positioned in simulations. In such cases, where the differences are merely technical or procedural, mutual recognition would not result in lowered standards; it would simply eliminate the unnecessary duplication of administrative work. 
The EC also stresses that mutual recognition would be agreed to on an issue by issue basis, so in areas where regulatory differences do reflect real political choices, neither party would be forced to accept the other’s standards as sufficient. Thus, they claim, the only reason regulatory convergence would affect EU standards is if, through this new cooperation, the two parties were able to develop more efficient procedures for ensuring a higher set of standards. This harmonization, they argue further, would create an international norm, encouraging other nations to adopt the same high standards.
B. Regulatory Convergence and Deregulation
On its face, the EC’s position seems valid: the point of negotiating is to find common ground. That said, negotiations, by nature, require compromise, and in making such compromises, certain interests will have to be prioritized over others. Unfortunately, the political environment in which this agreement is being negotiated – one that strongly favors regulatory harmonization and simplification – creates a risk that both sides will demonstrate too great a willingness to settle on standards, sparking a race to the bottom, where the lowest common standards become the law of both lands. 
In spite of the EC’s repeated assurances that deregulation is not their goal, it has become difficult to distinguish the push for regulatory convergence from a push for deregulation. The way policymakers conflate the two is evident in their discursive choices. Both the European Council’s mandate and the leaked EU position papers on the agreement, for example, are marked by a near-exclusive focus on decreasing regulatory barriers to trade, with the desire to maintain appropriate levels of health, safety, and environmental protection appearing as an afterthought, a minor qualification to this more central objective.
This is echoed in the rhetoric of TTIP proponents during public debates; they consistently characterize regulations as a nuisance, referring to them as either red tape or burdens on business and giving little lip service, if any, to the beneficial purposes they serve. Furthermore, these rhetorical devices likely reflect a genuine desire to consolidate the two agendas, given the broader political climate in Europe: both the UK Parliament’s Deregulation Bill and the EC’s Regulatory Fitness and Performance Program are outgrowths of a movement that views regulation as little more than a bureaucratic byproduct.
Whether the commingling of the regulatory convergence and deregulation agendas has been intentional or not, it suggests the final terms of the agreement are likely to be shifted in favor of deregulation. Delegating authority to the RCC further exacerbates this risk, as it would allow future regulatory decisions to be made in the same context, but without the backstop of ratification to constrain decision makers. The European Parliament’s Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety took note of this in a draft opinion on the TTIP, in which they expressed concern that the EC’s emphasis on regulatory convergence would “lead to a lowering of future EU standards in key areas for the protection of human health, food safety and the environment.” 
Indeed, their concerns seem to have been validated by a leaked EU position paper on regulatory coherence that reveals the influential role envisioned for business groups in affecting new RCC regulations. Although the terms of the proposal would allow other stakeholders, such as unions or environmental groups, a voice as well, it is unlikely any would have both the resources and incentives to meaningfully combat any deregulation pursued by big business. Given that the RCC would retain continued authority to establish new standards without additional approval by Member States, it appears likely that ratification of the TTIP would, over time, result in lower EU regulatory standards across the board.
C. Effects on Domestic Regulation
Furthermore, ratification of the TTIP would likely have many effects on domestic regulation by Member States, all tending to shift the balance in favor of deregulation. First, it is worth noting that regardless of the regulatory decisions made by Member States post-ratification, the RCC’s ability to create standards that supersede even those set by the EU would, on its own, result in a weakened role for domestic regulation. Additionally, ratification itself would signal a tacit approval of the EC’s push towards regulatory harmonization and simplification, perhaps indicating a preexisting willingness to accommodate deregulation.
Next, the mutual recognition of US standards would likely lead to competitive deregulation. Although the EC, when discussing mutual recognition, tends to refer to instances where the EU and US have essentially equivalent standards, European Court of Justice jurisprudence makes it clear that mutual recognition actually has a broader scope than equivalence; while the latter implies “quasi-identical obligations” or at least sufficient protection of the relevant interests, the former does not. This means mutual recognition could potentially be agreed to in negotiations, or later by the RCC, with regard to sectors in which the US has standards significantly lower than those set by individual Member States, for example, food and environmental safety. The cost for US firms to meet US standards would then likely be lower than the cost faced by domestic firms in meeting domestic standards, putting immense pressure on domestic regulators to lower standards.
An additional source of pressure emanates from the proposals outlined in the EU position paper dealing with regulatory coherence. It expounds “essential requirements” that would govern the post-ratification regulatory process on both sides of the ocean, including within specific Member States. The primary directive commands regulators to “engage in bilateral and international regulatory cooperation as part of fulfilling their domestic objectives, to maximize common regulatory goals and examine options that could enhance regulatory compatibility,” noting, however, that such a requirement is “without prejudice to their right to regulate.” This directive mirrors the negotiating mandate set by the European Council, in that the right to regulate is a mere qualification of the principal focus on regulatory coherence, and, similarly, would likely encourage regulators to prioritize trade and business at the expense of other legitimate regulatory interests. 
In fact, the paper further directs regulators to “cooperate… with a view to exploring trade facilitative solutions… [and] give due consideration to… joint requests from EU and US stakeholders,” essentially mandating that Member States allow business groups more involvement, and from an earlier stage, in the process of developing their domestic regulations. Finally, this proposal would serve a deregulation agenda even if other stakeholders, such as consumer interest groups, had the resources to compete with the big business lobbies. By requiring consultations with so many different agencies and interested parties at each stage of the process, these provisions would introduce significant delays into the regulatory process. Alone, this would have substantial effects on domestic regulation by hampering the ability of Member States to quickly and effectively regulate new fields, an ability that will only become more important in the coming years, given the rapid pace at which new technologies are being developed. 
III: Investor State Dispute Settlement	
	Despite the significant extent to which the TTIP’s regulatory cooperation measures threaten the effectiveness of domestic regulation, what has garnered far more public attention is the ISDS provision, the inclusion of which has provoked public opposition from various Member States and from the EU parliament itself. Particular attention has been called to the risk that US companies might abuse the provision to force the privatization of public services and to the risk that, even absent such abuse, the provision would have a chilling effect on domestic regulation. This section will first explore the inconsistencies between the historical function of ISDS and the insistence by negotiators that it be included in the agreement, then show that the risk of American companies using ISDS to constrain future domestic regulation is real, but overstated.
A. ISDS in the TTIP
	ISDS is a procedural mechanism frequently included in bilateral investment treaties (BITs) that encourages foreign direct investment (FDI) by giving companies that invest in a foreign market the right to bring the foreign government before an international arbitration tribunal if it believes governmental action has been taken in violation of the BIT, to the detriment of the company’s interests. While the creation of the RCC would represent a relatively new development in international law, ISDS has been a pervasive feature in BITs since at least the 1980s; in fact, despite the fierce opposition to the inclusion of ISDS in the TTIP, nearly all of the 1400 BITs concluded by EU Member States contain some procedure for ISDS.  Furthermore, of the 608 cases that have been initiated since the first ISDS clause was implemented, 327 have been brought by investors from Member States, and only 29 have been made against Member States by investors outside the EU.
	That EU companies would be the main beneficiaries of ISDS is unsurprising in light of the historical purpose of these provisions. Absent its inclusion in a BIT, an investor seeking to enforce its rights would have no choice but to bring the case before the foreign government’s own courts. The deferral of authority to an impartial arbitration tribunal, therefore, encourages FDI in underdeveloped nations by eliminating the risk that a corrupt judicial system, under the influence of the foreign government, refuses to award damages for violations of the treaty. As a result, most ISDS cases are initiated by investors in more developed nations against the governments of less developed nations.
	Although this helps explain the proportion of ISDS cases initiated by EU Member States, it begs the question of why such a provision is needed with respect to the TTIP: a trade partnership between the two most developed economies in the world. The sophistication of the EU’s and US’s economies, investor protection regimes, and judicial systems, cast suspicion on the ISDS provision and on the negotiators who have insisted upon its necessity in the TTIP. This suspicion is intensified by the fact that, in 2013, the European Parliament voted, almost unanimously, against the inclusion in any future investment agreements of ISDS provisions that could not specifically be justified and that the US refrained from including one in its 2004 FTA with Australia on the grounds that the judicial systems of both nations were sufficiently reliable. This is by no means proof of any insidious intentions, but it does warrant an evaluation of the criticisms expressed regarding the inclusion of an ISDS provision, especially considering the breadth of subjects the TTIP is expected to cover.
B. The Ratchet Clause
	The first criticism involves the possible use of ISDS to enforce the ratchet clause that many fear the TTIP will contain. This clause would render binding any autonomous liberalization by Member States, potentially preventing them from reversing deregulatory action. This is of particular concern with regards to public services. For example, if a Member State were to experiment with allowing US companies to participate in an area like health care or education, then later chose to reverse that decision, the ratchet clause would give the US companies that had entered the temporarily open market a claim against the government. 
Despite reassurances by a number of officials that public services would be exempt from such a provision, recently leaked documents suggest that a range of public services – including health services, education, water, sewage, infrastructure, and postal services – still fall within the scope of the TTIP. The fact that EU negotiators have not yet taken important public services off the table means it is still possible that the terms of the final agreement would require that any autonomous liberalization by a Member State be made permanent. 
That those public services are still on the negotiating table, however, does not necessarily mean they will be included in the final agreement. The TTIP negotiations have been, and will continue to be, a long and complex process. EU negotiators immediately declaring so many sectors off limits would very likely have resulted in an inability for both parties to continue negotiating effectively. Because there are already issues on which the US has made clear they will not budge – financial regulation, for example – there is still room for EU negotiators to maneuver. But even if the agreement were to retain these terms in its final version, EU citizens should take at least some comfort from the fact that violation of the ratchet clause would only give companies grounds to seek damages. As long as the government is willing to pay out the penalties, they would never truly be forced into allowing privatization. Finally, it is worth noting that the threat of these damages could actually have the effect of discouraging deregulation when regulators are on the fence.
C. The Chilling Effect
The second criticism involving ISDS is that the threat alone of being taken to arbitration by US companies may be enough to discourage Member States from enacting various regulations. There is some evidence that Canadian regulators may have experienced such a chilling effect in the past: former Canadian government officials have gone on record, stating that American corporate lawyers have used threats to initiate ISDS cases to successfully kill a number of regulatory initiatives dealing with cleaning chemicals, pharmaceuticals, pesticides, cigarette packaging and patents. However, there is no conclusive proof supporting that claim nor proving the existence of such a chilling effect generally. Given the magnitude of sums that could be involved, it is likely that domestic regulators would give at least some consideration to the potential costs of upsetting US investors, but there is no reason to buy into the fears that ratification would effectively rob Member States of their ability to enact domestic regulations. Overall, this threat of arbitration will, in conjunction with the effects noted in Section II, most likely function as simply another weight on the scale, tilting the domestic agenda’s balance a little further away from stronger regulations.
IV: Conclusion	
As the final version of the TTIP is bound to be an incredibly complex agreement, it would be naïve to believe that the proposed terms discussed in this paper are the only ones worth considering for their effects on domestic regulation. In fact, it is quite possible that many of these terms do not survive the negotiations. Nevertheless, the analysis in the previous sections allows for two significant conclusions to be drawn.
First, if the final version does resemble the one envisioned in these leaked negotiation documents, even if only with respect to the chapters concerned with regulatory cooperation, it is highly likely that ratification would result in a lowering of standards over time in the EU as a whole and by domestic regulators. Recall that the RCC would retain the authority to set new standards that supersede any others set in the EU and that these standards would be developed in an environment that is tilted towards regulatory coherence and simplification in a way that favors trade and business interests over all others. Neither this, nor the fact that ratification by Member States would signal agreement with this agenda, means that domestic regulation would simply collapse post-ratification. However, in combination with the proposed requirements that domestic regulators not only make the interests of trade partners and other stakeholders a primary concern, but also engage in numerous time consuming consultations before enacting new regulations, these factors make it likely that, after ratification, domestic regulation would become more vulnerable to corporate influence and that domestic policy would become more aligned with a deregulation agenda.
Second, in light of the above, the amount of public attention that has been directed towards the ISDS provision is unwarranted. While it could pose some degree of a threat to the ability of Member States to effectively engage in domestic regulation, this threat is considerably smaller than the one posed by the regulatory cooperation mechanisms. Opponents of the TTIP have overstated both the potential for ISDS to be used as a means of forcing privatization of public services and the potential for it to be used as a means of killing regulatory initiatives before they are enacted. Such overemphasis may help build support against the agreement but can be counterproductive, especially if it takes attention away from the more serious threat posed by regulatory convergence.
Ultimately, the effects the TTIP would have on domestic regulation can not be known until a final agreement is reached and ratified. But whatever pressure is exerted on individual Member States, the ability to veto the agreement means, no matter what, negotiators will not have the ability to force acceptance of a deregulation agenda. This should encourage more representatives from more Member State to follow the lead of those who have already made their voices heard and make it clear that they will not support a TTIP that prioritizes trade and business over all other social and environmental interests because a failure to act now may forfeit the chance to act later.

