ROUGHLY EDITED COPY
NCRA
AUGUST 8, 2013
8:30 a.m. CST
CART Provided By:
Caption First, Inc.
P.O. Box 3066
Monument, CO 80132
1-877-825-5234
+001-719-481-9835
Www.captionfirst.com
***
 This text is being provided in a rough draft format.
Communication Access Realtime Translation (CART) is provided
in order to facilitate communication accessibility and may
not be a totally verbatim record of the proceedings.
>> TAMI KEENAN: Please take your seats.
>> TAMI KEENAN: Please take your seats. We'll be
starting in a moment. Thanks. End.
Is this on?
>> TAMI KEENAN: Good morning. At this time, please turn
off or silence all your cell phones.
I am Tami Keenan, NCRA President. The chair's honored to
call the annual business meeting of the 2013 annual
convention of the National Court Reporter's Association here
in the great City of Nashville, Tennessee. Before we get
started with the agenda of business, the chair would like to
have a moment of silence in honor of all our colleagues and
friends in the profession who have passed away over the past
year.
Thank you.
The next three agenda items require a vote of the members.
In preparation for that vote, please get out your blue voting
cards.
Here with our credentials report is chair of the
Credentials Committee, President-Elect Nancy Varallo.
>> NANCY VARALLO: Madame President, the credentials
committee reports that there are 73 voting members registered
for the business meeting at this time. Quorum is no fewer
than 25 voting members present. By direction of the
Credentials Committee, I move the adoption of the Credentials
Committee report.
>> TAMI KEENAN: The vote is on the adoption of the report
of the Credentials Committee. Are you ready to vote? Those
in favor of the adoption of the report of the Credentials
Committee please raise your BLUE voting card. Those opposed,
please raise your BLUE voting cards. There is an majority in
the affirmative and the report of the Credentials Committee
is adopted. A quorum is present. And the next business in
order is the adoption of the standing rules. President-Elect
Nancy Varallo is chair of the Rules Committee and will give
the report.
>> NANCY VARALLO: Madame President and members, the
standing rules for this meeting are included in the annual
business meeting handout distributed as you entered the room.
Please get out your copy of the standing rules.
By direction of the Rules Committee, I move that the rules
included in the handout be the rules of this meeting.
>> TAMI KEENAN: The vote is on the adoption of the
meeting standing rules as printed in your handout. Without
objection, they will not be read.
There is no objection. Is there any discussion on the
rules? Are you ready to vote? Those in favor of the
adoption of the meeting standing rules, please raise your
BLUE voting card. Thank you. Those opposed, please raise
your BLUE voting card. There are 2/3 in the affirmative and
the annual business meeting standing rules are adopted.
The next business is the adoption of the agenda.
>> NANCY VARALLO: Madame President, the agenda is also
included in the meeting handout. I got excited. Madame
President, I move adoption of the agenda as presented.
>> TAMI KEENAN: The vote is on the adoption of the agenda
as presented. Ready to vote? Those in favor please raise
your BLUE voting card. Thank you. Those opposed, please
raise your BLUE voting card.
There being a majority in the affirmative, the motion
passes and the agenda is adopted.
The chair would now like to introduce your 2012-2013 board
of directors. As your name is called, will each board member
rise and remain standing. Please hold your applause until
after all names are read.
President-Elect Nancy Varallo, RDR, CRR, FAPR, of
Worcester, Massachusetts. 
Vice President Sarah Nageotte, RDR, CRR, CBC, of
Jefferson, Ohio. Secretary-treasurer Steve Zinone, RPR,of
Canandaigua, New York..
Immediate Past President, Doug Friend RDR, CRR, of
Portland, Oregon.
Director Patricia Graves RDR, CRR, CCP of Monument,
Colorado.
Director Toni O'Neill, RPR, FAPR, of Riverside,
California.
Director Glyn Poage, RDR, CRR, FAPR, Helotes, Texas.
Director Doreen Sutton RPR, of Scottsdale, Arizona.
Director Karen Teig, RPR, CRR, CMRS, of Cedar Rapids,
Iowa.
Director Heidi Thomas, FAPR, RDR, CRR, CBC, of Roswell,
Georgia.
Director Christine Willette, RMR, CRR, CCP, of Rothschild,
Wisconsin.
Director, Tiva Wood, RDR, CMRS, FAPR, Mechanicsburg,
Pennsylvania.
Director Viola Zborowski, RMR, CRR, of Long Valley, New
Jersey.
And our Executive Director and Chief Executive Officer Jim
Cudahy CAE, of NCRA Headquarters, Vienna, Virginia.
Please join me in thanking the officers and directors for
their hard work
(Applause.)
>> TAMI KEENAN: The chair would like to introduce to you
the person who will be seated to my left during our meeting,
Parliamentarian, Nancy Sylvester from Illinois. She's a
Certified Professional Parliamentarian and is the author of
The Complete Idiot's Guide to Robert's Rules and The
Guerilla's Guide to Robert's Rules. A few years ago Nancy
completed a term as the parliamentarian of the National
Association of the Parliamentarians. She is the first
parliamentarian who has been selected as NAP Parliamentarian
for a second time.
(Applause.)
 The chair would also like to introduce to you our
general counsel, Jeff Altman, of Whiteford, Taylor and
Preston, LLP, of Washington, D.C.
Our CART reporting today is being provided by Caption
First. Darlene Pickard, RDR, CRR, CBC, CCP of Caption
Northwest, Incorporated, Marysville, Washington, is the CART
provider for this meeting. Thank you, Darlene and Caption
First.
(Applause.) 
As has been our practice for the past several years,
streaming text of the business meeting is being broadcast on
NCRA's Web site. And now it's my pleasure to introduce
Secretary-Treasurer Steve Zinone who will present the
secretary-treasurer's report.
>> STEVE ZINONE: Thank you, President Tami. Good
morning, ladies and gentlemen.
As mentioned, I am Steve Zinone. And it has been my
distinct pleasure this past year to serve as NCRA's
Secretary-Treasurer. I am likewise honored to be continuing
in this capacity for the 2013-2014 fiscal year. Anyone who
knows me knows that in anything I do, I am going to bring
passion and energy in that work. In that way, I am like a
lot of the people in this room because as a community, NCRA
has some fabulous people within our ranks. And, together, we
are doing great work to advance our great and historic
profession.
Several weeks ago I had the opportunity to visit the Long
Island Business Institute during what we referred to as a
Campus Mini Convention. While out on Long Island, I could
not resist the chance to head out to Islip, which is located
out on the island in New York, and visit the Gallery of
Shorthand that has been assembled there by our good friend
Dominic Tursi. My heart swelled with pride in seeing the
eager young faces of the students at the Long Island Business
Institute, the future of our profession. And likewise, when
I pondered the long and storied history of our profession in
Dom's gallery. We live in interesting times. We have a deep
past in chronicling some of the biggest events that have
occurred in our planet. And we will continue to play a
critical role in the future in ways that most of us have not
yet even imagined. At the end of all I just described is
NCRA. And while you hear Tami, Nancy, and Jim talk in more
detall here and throughout the convention about the important
initiatives that are underfoot as part of our new strategic
plan, my job as Secretary-Treasurer which is described in
Article XI, Section 7, of the Constitution & Bylaws is to
oversee the financial side of the equation. As the
Secretary-Treasurer I am the chair of NCRA's finance and
planning and audit committees. Obviously, I could not do this
work by myself. So right from the beginning, I would like to
acknowledge the board members who served on both the finance
and planning and audit committees. They are R. Douglas
Friend from Oregon, Patricia Graves from Colorado, and Nativa
Wood of Pennsylvania. I cannot speak highly enough of the
care and commitment each of them brought to this important
work. I thank them so much for being there to help me with 
information that can at times be complex.
I also would like to thank Wendel Stewart, NCRA's Senior
Director for Finance and Administration.
While I personally and the members of the Finance and
Planning Committee collectively are closely involved with
NCRA's finances, Wendel lives this stuff every day and he
deserves a high degree of credit.
So if you would, please join me in thanking them for their
service on these important committees over the past year.
(Applause)
Part of my responsibility as Chair of the Finance &
Planning Committee is to review financial reports and ensure
that the Board receives accurate, timely, and complete
information. Throughout the year, we are also responsible
for monitoring income, expenses, and program activities
against the budget and to ensure that funds are appropriately
being spent and support the priorities that have been
established for the year.
Another important duty is to review in detail the
association's IRS Form 990 with the entire Board and outside
counsel. If you're not familiar with this form, it's the
rough equivalent of the tax return that you or I submit to
the IRS each year, except the 990 is specific to public
charities and other-tax exempt organizations such as NCRA and
NCRF.
In terms of disclosure of this document, we make the most
recently filed 990 as well as past years' 990s available on
the NCRA website at no charge.
This is beyond what is required by law and not something
that most organizations do.
We are required by law to furnish the 990 to anyone who
makes a request, but it is permissible to do this by surface
mail and to charge the person who makes the request for the
staff time, photocopying, and shipping costs associated with
fulfilling the request. We don't do that…we publish it right
on the website for members.
We want to answer to a high degree of disclosure.
While I compare the Form 990 to a tax return for
simplicity sake, it is much more than that. It provides
information on the organization's governance, management
structure, compensation, and operating policies and
procedures.
Additional responsibilities of the Finance & Planning
Committee are to meet with the association's investment
advisors, Graystone Consulting, to review NCRA's investment
strategies and performance, to look at how we allocate our
investments and otherwise ensure that our financial reserves 
are well managed.
Equally or more important, we also meet with Clifton --
excuse me, CliftonLarsonAllen, NCRA's external auditors. I
will provide an update on both items in a few minutes.
Staying within the tradition of the Business Meeting, let
me give you an overview of the results of the Association's
year-end audit for the period ending September 30, 2012.
For those of you who do not know, NCRA's fiscal year runs
from October 1st, which happens to be my birthday --
(Laughter)
-- to September 30th.
For anyone who is interested, a copy of the FY 2012 audit
is available in the back of the room and also on NCRA's
website.
There is probably no more important role the
Secretary/Treasurer fulfills than his or her supervision of
the annual audit process. The benefits and logic behind
using an outside, independent auditor is to ensure that
appropriate separation exists between those handling and
managing our finances on a day-to-day basis - NCRA staff -
and those verifying that our financial statements and
processes.
That is extremely important.
Annually, we (the Finance & Planning Committee along with
the Officers of the Board) have the opportunity to speak with
CliftonLarsonAllen to go over everything relating to NCRA's
financial operations.
This meeting includes an Executive Session during which no
professional staff are present, including the Executive
Director & CEO. This gives the committee and me the chance
to ask questions of the auditors that for some reason we
might not be comfortable asking with staff present.
Who knows what those questions might be?
It's our duty to poke and probe and see if there's
anything we might be missing…this even if we feel complete
trust in our staff. You've heard the phrase "Trust, but
Verify?"
That's what we do. And I'm thankful to say that this
conversation has done nothing other than to verify that our
financial controls we have in place are doing their job and
that our numbers are being presented without
misrepresentation.
As noted, CliftonLarsonAllen conducted the audit for
Fiscal Year 2012, covering the period from October 1, 2011
through September 30, 2012.
Its work consisted of auditing NCRA's financial
transactions to ensure that accuracy and compliance with 
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (otherwise known as
GAAP), as well as considering the effectiveness of internal
controls and procedures.
For this past fiscal year, I am pleased to report that.
CliftonLarsonAllen reported no material weaknesses in
NCRA's internal controls or financial standing.
In other words, we received an unqualified opinion, which
in accounting terms represents a clean bill of health.
Next, I will provide you with a brief overview of the
results from the audited financial statements.
I'm a numbers guy-kind of a nerd that way-but I know how
much all of us hate to WRITE complicated numbers, so let me
simplify things even though I doubt our captioner needs much
help.
For fiscal year 2012, NCRA ended the year with a negative
change in net assets, or a deficit of $440,000.
This was driven largely by a number of factors. Our
membership dipped.
Our Convention attendance was not up to par.
We saw advertising sales drop.
And, with fewer members, we saw fewer people sitting for
our certification exams.
Nonetheless, we also ended the year with approximately $8
million in total assets.
In the association world, one way to determine financial
viability is to look at the percentage of an organization's
net assets as compared to its operating budget.
In terms of best practice, Associations typically shoot
for having total net assets equal to 58% of their operating
budget.
We ended the year, fiscal year 2013, at 62.6%, which is
above the industry's best practice.
We maintain financial reserves to be prepared for the
unexpected; it's like an insurance policy…to invest in
important initiatives, which we have done in recent years,
and also to account for deficits, like what we experienced in
fiscal year 2012.
You never know when you will need to use reserves and it
is good to have them available.
On the investment side, our investment portfolio -
composed of stocks, bonds, and a small amount of alternative
assets - managed by Graystone Consulting ended fiscal year
2012 with total investments of $3,982,970 with a rate of
return of a positive 15.02%.
(Applause)
Fortunately, the markets and our portfolio have continued
to do well, and as of May 31, 2013 we have $4,284,437 in 
investments.
In addition, we have experienced a year to date (October
2012 through May 2013) return of 7.96%.
It is encouraging to see our portfolio performing well so
far this year-and, again, because I'm a numbers guy-I'm
guessing we've continued to do well as January was a great
month as well.
Except the market did go down for the first time in two
months as I just talked about.
As we reiterate each year, we don't budget for investment
income-as you don't know whether the market is going to go up
or down in a given year.
This concludes the information on the audit.
Let me switch gears and briefly share with you some
information regarding the development of the fiscal year 2014
budget, which was approved on Tuesday by the Board.
I mentioned the deficit of $440,000 last year.
While we have reserves to cover such losses, we can't each
year see such drops.
In recent years, as we invested in education, in advocacy,
and last year in the transition to a new executive director
and CEO, we have budgeted for a deficit to start the year.
So, some of what you saw in fiscal year 2012 was
anticipated … but not all of it.
This year, we are budgeting significantly in initiatives
associated with our new strategic plan-in Education to
support our schools, in Awareness efforts to build wider
recognition of our profession, and in other areas that
members and the Board have decided are important to the
future of our profession.
And, yet, for the first time in a few years, we are NOT
budgeting for a deficit in real terms, which is to say that
our fiscal year 2014 budget calls for expenditures that
exceed budgeted revenue by about $70,000, or within the
category that is safe to call "break-even."
This was not easy to do. We had to go into a major
belt-tightening mode to reduce expenses across the board. And
we need to re-double our efforts on membership recruitment to
ensure that we at least abate-and hopefully reverse to some
modest degree-the decline in membership that we've seen for
more than a decade.
We are seeing our membership recruitment efforts having a
positive effect…but we need to do more and we will.
I mentioned advertising sales as a disappointment in
fiscal year 2012.
What we've done for fiscal years 2013 and 2014 is turn our
advertising model on its head.
Sometime after you arrive home, you're going to see the
NCRA membership directory, what we call the "Sourcebook,"
arrive in your mailbox. Most of you haven't laid eyes on the
Sourcebook in many years…and we're changing the model this
year to send a copy to every member. It will look and feel
different, to be sure, but the new Sourcebook will have a
dramatic, positive effect on advertising revenue, it will be
of substantial more benefit to members because so many more
sets of eyes will be crossing it, and-get this-it will cost
less to produce and mail than what we have spent in the past.
There are many more examples of such innovative thinking
within the 2014 budget. We will continue to look for ways
to improve our bottom line.
And we will continue to put support and funding behind the
strategic priorities as identified by the membership and by
the Board.
Last year, NCRA made some fundamental changes in the
selection of a new executive to lead our association at the
operational level. From there, we've seen some substantial
changes on the way the Board is conducting our oversight
role. And we're likewise making changes to enhance the manner
in which NCRA's committees and volunteers engage with the
association and execute-along with our staff-on the
activities that are most important to our profession and to
our community.
Such profound changes take some time to have full effect.
In looking at our most recent financial statements, from
May 31st-or about two months ago-we're seeing revenue that is
lower than what we had budgeted for fiscal year 2013, and
that's not a good thing.
But we're likewise seeing expenses for fiscal year 2013
that are lower than what we've budgeted, so that's a good
thing.
The Finance Committee will continue to receive reports and
monitor the association's performance through the end of the
fiscal year.
Let me conclude by reiterating that it has been an honor
to serve as your Secretary/Treasurer for the past year and I
look forward to continuing in this important role over the
next 12 months.
Thank you.
(Applause)
>> TAMI KEENAN: Thank you, Steve, for your fine service
as Secretary-Treasurer of our association.
And thank you as well to NCRA's chief financial officer,
Wendel Stewart.
The next business in order is the report of the Nominating 
Committee. Here to present the report is Nominating
Committee Chair Doug Friend.
>> DOUG FRIEND: Good morning. Madam President, the
Nominating Committee submits the following slate of nominees.
I will ask each nominee to stand as I call his or her name.
And please hold your applause until the end.
Directors, 3-year terms:
Debra A. Dibble, RDR, CRR, CBC, CCP, of Woodland, Utah.
Sue A. Terry, RPR, CRR, of Springfield, Ohio
Michele York, RPR, of Candia, N.H.
Secretary-Treasurer, Steve Zinone, RPR, of Canandaigua,
New York.
Vice President, Glyn Poage, RDR, CRR, FAPR, of Helotes,
Texas.
President-Elect, Sarah E. Nageotte, RDR, CRR, CBC, of
Jefferson, Ohio.
Please join me.
(Applause)
>> DOUG FRIEND: Thank you. I would also like to thank
the other nominating committee members. It was an honor to
work with all of them. That would be Shirley Hall, you can
stand, if you would.
Jo Anne Leger.If you're here. There she is.
Lisa Michaels, Mary Burzynski and Rick Levy for their hard
work.
If you would join me in giving them a round of applause.
(Applause.)
Madame President, this completes the report of the
nominating committee.
>> TAMI KEENAN: Thank you, Doug.
In accordance with Article VI, Section 2 of the
Constitution and Bylaws, Nancy C. Varallo, RDR, CRR, FAPR,
will automatically assume the office of President of the
National Court Reporters Association at the close of this
meeting.
Since the deadline for additional nominations has passed
and, as you just heard, there is only one candidate for each
open position of Director and Officer, the Chair declares
that the slate of Directors and Officers as presented are
elected by acclamation to their respective offices of the
National Court Reporters Association and will assume their
duties at the close of this Convention.
These Officers and Directors will be formally installed at
the Premiere Session tomorrow morning.
Congratulations!
(Applause)
>> TAMI KEENAN: Thank you for joining us here in 
Nashville for NCRA's 2013 Convention & Expo!
This annual gathering of the NCRA family is a true
celebration-a celebration of what we have accomplished in the
past year and a celebration of what our future holds.
I'm so pleased to stand here before you as the outgoing
NCRA president. I have had a year's worth of celebrating-on
many fronts. In addition to the honor of serving the
profession I have loved with all of my heart for more than
two decades, my heart has grown in other ways as well.
As we celebrated the life of my last husband -- last
husband. Oops. Late husband, Bear, last year, I had no way
of knowing that I'd be standing here today with a full heart,
a joyous house, and a brand-new last name.
All year, I encouraged you to dream, believe, and inspire.
And there were times throughout the last year when I needed
to remind myself of that mantra-sometimes more than once a
day when my work was piling up, my plane was delayed, or I
had 50 NCRA emails to address before I could go to sleep at
night.And my dogs wanted to go outside.
But I dreamed about what we could accomplish, I believed
we had the collective talent to reach our goals, and I was
inspired to leave a lasting impression on the association
that has served me in so many ways throughout my career.
This year was a whirlwind, but as the dust settles and I
look back at what we have accomplished, I'm filled with pride
about how we are positioned for the future.
Think back to those quiet days in February when the first
National Court Reporting and Captioning Week exploded onto
the scene.
I don't think any of us could have anticipated the reach
and effect we could have when we worked together to share
some key messages about our profession. It was truly a
grassroots effort and it was so successful that it will now
be a regular occurrence for NCRA and our members.
We also decided a year ago that we would ask the difficult
questions and have the hard conversations that were necessary
to address the challenges we face in getting students
into-and successfully out of-court reporting programs. We
brought some of the best minds in the industry to the table
and had those conversations-many conversations throughout the
year that resulted in some game-changing results. You will
hear more about this initiative-something we've nicknamed
VEETF because Vision for Educational Excellence Task Force is
more than a mouthful-well into the future because I'm proud
to say that NCRA's Board has jumped in feet first to pursue
these potential solutions. In a nutshell, we've
conceptualized a way to offer a very basic theory class 
online using one-syllable words and an iPad app for those who
are considering the profession. Better yet, we hope to gain
potential students who aren't considering the profession but
might have a change of heart after experiencing the "speed
texting" that court reporting offers.
We're also developing a report with the help of an
economic research firm that could project the demand for
court reporting services three to five years into the future.
This would prove incredibly helpful to court reporting
programs because they would have third-party data to show
that there are, indeed, jobs waiting for successful students.
I also want to share with you the success stories of our
Task Force on Contracting and Ethics First. These groups of
talented volunteers accomplished the tasks they were assigned
by the board-delivering valuable educational resources for
NCRA-and have now been "retired from active duty." These are
great examples of how the NCRA volunteer process works-they
were assigned goals, they worked together to accomplish those
goals, and now these volunteers should be proud of the legacy
they have left our organization. Many thanks to the Task
Force on Contracting and the Ethics First Task Force. We are
eternally grateful.
There are exciting things happening thanks to NCRA's
talented staff as well. Under the leadership of CEO and
Executive Director Jim Cudahy, our government relations team
has supported numerous state affiliates facing significant
legislative issues. We have developed improved processes and
communications vehicles at headquarters, and we've invested
in the development of some publications and other educational
resources designed to help our members achieve widespread
success.
Another striking example of volunteerism at its best is
TRAIN or Taking Realtime Awareness and Innovation Nationwide.
. Through the widespread efforts of NCRA volunteers, our
realtime preparedness educational program is stronger than
it's ever been. We are encouraging realtime success-one
member at a time-and we have even recently launched a TRAIN
resource center on NCRA.org. We aim to empower reporters to
help reporters. And the TRAIN concept is grassroots energy at
its best.
Speaking of grassroots, our Government Relations
department does a fantastic job of training our state leaders
how to grassroots lobby and works tirelessly on court
reporters and NCRA's behalf on Capitol Hill. Help support
our PAC fund by purchasing our latest edition of the Men of
Court Reporting calendar.
Finally, I want to mention NCRA's strategic plan, Vision 
2018. Countless hours of research, conversations, and
strategy building has gone into this five-year plan for
NCRA-and not just among NCRA's leadership. We've conducted
member studies. We've invited industry vendors, educators,
and other notable representatives of our profession to
contribute. We have challenged conventional thought
processes, reached high, and built a framework that will not
only strengthen NCRA for the next handful of years, but set
us up for long-term success far into the future.
Everything that was accomplished this last year would not
have been possible without the hard work and support of the
NCRA Board of Directors, as well as NCRA staff, and for that
I want to give you my sincere and heartfelt thanks.
It's difficult to express in words the quality of people
that I have had the privilege and honor of serving with on
this board, and our association is truly blessed to have
these wonderful people dedicating so much time.
I also would like to extend my gratitude to the cadre of
member volunteers, who work so hard to carry out the
ambitious vision that all of us have for NCRA and our
profession.
As I hand over the proverbial reins to my dear, dear
friend Nancy Varallo very soon, (chuckling) I am confident
that the transition will be seamless because it is surrounded
by the energy and momentum that this association is currently
experiencing. We are focused on the issues that matter. We
are energized about the opportunities that lie ahead. We will
succeed because even though we might have a good brief for
failure in our dictionary, we have an even a better one for
success.
My friends, my court reporting family-I am proud of what
we have accomplished this year. I'm so blessed and humbled to
have been a part of the legacy of this organization. Thank
you for enriching my life with this experience of being your
president.
(Applause)
>> JIM CUDAHY: It's been a great honor for me to work
with Tami over the last 12 months and long before that. And
I know that Tami has been through a lot personally and
professionally over the past year and it's -- I could -- for
one, am glad that the board, staff, membership was this to
help you out during that period.
As one part of our tribute to your work with NCRA, we
would like to offer you this, which is tradition. It's an
American flag that has been flown over the U.S. capitol by
your Senator Debbie Stabenow. I'm sorry. I even put it
phonetically on the piece of paper I had. But, you know, 
take that. Bring it to your new house. Find a good place to
fly it and congratulations on a great year.
>> TAMI KEENAN: Thank you.
(Applause.)
>> TAMI KEENAN: The next business in order is
consideration of the proposed bylaws amendments.
In your packet you will find the Proposed Bylaws
Amendments. There are six of them. Please have them in
front of you at this time.
Since the amendments have been printed and distributed to
the members, if there is no objection, neither the Bylaws
Committee Chair, nor the Chair will read them in their
entirety.
Cathy Phillips, Chair of the Bylaws Committee will present
the bylaws amendments. The Chair now recognizes Cathy
Phillips.
>> CATHY PHILLIPS: On behalf of the Bylaws Committee, I
move the adoption of Bylaw Amendment #1, Article III -
Membership, Section 7 e), by striking Section e) in its
entirety from the bylaws.
>> TAMI KEENAN: The question is on the adoption of Bylaw
Amendment #1 Article III - Membership, Section 7 e) as
printed and distributed to the members.
Is there any discussion?
Since we are amending the NCRA Bylaws, the vote required
will be a two-thirds vote.
According to our bylaws and the rules for this meeting,
the final voting on bylaw amendments shall take place
electronically, at a secure online website. The voting shall
open within two hours after the close of the meeting and
shall remain open for 12 hours. The announcement of the
results shall be done by the chair, as soon as judged
appropriate, and shall then be placed on the NCRA website.
At the end of this meeting, the Chair will give you
instructions for voting.
Cathy, please continue.
>> CATHY PHILLIPS: On behalf of the Bylaws Committee, I
move the adoption of Bylaw Amendment #2, Article VIII -
Nomination and Election of Officers and Directors, Section 3,
by striking the sentence, "Such nominations and supporting
material shall be posted in the registration area at the
annual convention meeting site prior to convening the annual
business meeting."
>> TAMI KEENAN: The question is on the adoption of Bylaw
Amendment #2, Article VIII - Nomination and Election of
Officers and Directors, Section 3, as printed and distributed
to the members.
Is there any discussion?
Since we are amending the NCRA Bylaws, the vote required
will be a two-thirds vote and the vote will be online as
previously described.
Please continue, Cathy.
>> CATHY PHILLIPS: On behalf of the Bylaws Committee, I
move the adoption of Bylaw Amendment #3, Article X - Academy
of Professional Reporters and Council of the Academy of
Professional Reporters, Section 3, Council of the Academy of
Professional Reporters by inserting the words, ", as well as
voting representation from at least one consumer or public
member," after the words "of at least five (5) Fellows" and
before the words, "appointed by the President…"
>> TAMI KEENAN: The vote is on the adoption of Bylaw
Amendment #3, Article X - Academy of Professional Reporters
and Council of the Academy of Professional Reporters, Section
3, Council of the Academy of Professional Reporters as
printed and distributed to the members.
Is there any discussion?
Since we are amending the NCRA Bylaws, the vote required
will be a two-thirds vote and the vote will be online as
previously described.
Please continue, Cathy..
>> CATHY PHILLIPS: Adoption of Bylaw Amendment #4,
Article XI - Council on Approved Student Education, CASE
Policies and Procedures Manual by striking the words, "CASE
Policies and Procedures Manual" after the words "shall be set
out in the" and before the words, "all of which shall be…"
and insert the words, "General Requirements and Minimum
Standards."
It is also proposed to strike the sentence, "The CASE
Policies and Procedures Manual shall include the present
General Requirements and Minimum Standards manual."
>> TAMI KEENAN: The vote is on the adoption of Bylaw
Amendment #4, Article XI - Council on Approved Student
Education, CASE Policies and Procedures Manual as printed
and distributed to the members.
Is there any discussion?
Since we are amending the NCRA Bylaws, the vote required
will be a two-thirds vote and the vote will be online as
previously described.
Cathy, please continue.
> CATHY PHILLIPS: On behalf of the Bylaws Committee, I
move the adoption of Bylaw Amendment #5, Article XII -
Structure, Section 2, Committees, Councils and Task Forces,
by inserting the words, "members, who may be" after the words
"shall consist of five (5)" and before the words, "past 
recipients of the…."
>> TAMI KEENAN: The vote is on the adoption of Bylaw
Amendment #5, Article XII - Structure, Section 2,
Committees, Councils and Task Forces as printed and
distributed to the members.
Is there any discussion?
Since we are amending the NCRA Bylaws, the vote required
will be a two-thirds vote and the vote will be online as
previously described.
Cathy, please continue.
>> CATHY PHILLIPS: On behalf of the Bylaws Committee, I
move the adoption of Bylaw Amendment #6, Article XII -
Structure, Section 3, President's Advisory Council, by
striking Section 3 in its entirety from the bylaws.
>> TAMI KEENAN: The vote is on the adoption of Bylaw
Amendment #6, Article XII - Structure, Section 3, President's
Advisory Council as printed and distributed to the members.
Is there any discussion?
Since we are amending the NCRA Bylaws, the vote required
will be a two-thirds vote and the vote will be online as
previously described.
Cathy, please continue.
>> CATHY PHILLIPS: Madam President, that concludes the
report of the Bylaws Committee. I would like to thank the
members of the Committee, Jo Anne Leger and Michele York for
their hard work.
>> TAMI KEENAN: Thank you, Cathy.
(Applause).
Is there any new business?
>> Madame President?
>> TAMI KEENAN: Could you use the microphone, please.
There's one right over here. Just so -- there's a time limit
of three minutes and please identify yourself for the record.
>> LINDA HALLWORTH: Thank you, madam chair, my name is
Linda Hallworth. I'm president of the Alberta Shorthand
Reporter's Association. I would like to propose the debate
and vote on a main motion on under new business, motion being
that NCRA conduct a secure online survey of its members to
collect information on the income from court reporting, CART,
and broadcast captioning to be reviewed and disseminated to
board members, staff, and state leaders on or before 2014
NCRA convention and expo. The purpose of this motion is to
empower --
>> TAMI KEENAN: Wait, wait, excuse me. The rules state
that you're to hand a motion in in writing. Do you have it
in writing? 
>> AUDIENCE: I do.
>> TAMI KEENAN: I need a second on the motion.
>> AUDIENCE: The chair is asking for a seconder.
>> MAE PITTMAN: I second the motion.
>> Did she read the whole thing?
>> TAMI KEENAN: I have to read it before I read it first.
The motion is that NCRA conduct a secure online survey of its
members to collect information on the income from court
reporting, CART, and broadcast captioning, to be reviewed and
disseminated to board members, staff, and state leaders on or
before the 2014 NCRA convention and expo. The purpose of
this motion -- is there any discussion? Linda?
>> LINDA HALLWORTH: If I could just have the motion back
for a minute. Before the -- by way of explanation, the
purpose of this motion is to empower national and state
leaders current and accurate industry information. Using a
company such as Survey Monkey and NCRA existing membership
lists, this survey could be conducted for less than $500 but
the information gained will be priceless.
>> TAMI KEENAN: Is there any further discussion?
>> RICK GREENSPAN: Could I speak against this now?
>> TAMI KEENAN: If you identify yourself. Go to the
microphone.
>> RICK GREENSPAN: I'm Rick Greenspan, Palm Beach
Gardens, Florida. Hey, Doug.
>> TAMI KEENAN: You have three minutes. Mr. Greenspan.
Rick, we can't hear you very well.
>> RICK GREENSPAN: I'm back on the board. I don't think
the IRS knows how much reporters earn. And I'm just against
this. I think we know how much court reporters earn and I --
I don't see a reason for putting this information out for
anybody to subpoena.
>> TAMI KEENAN: Linda, we have to let everyone else speak
before you can speak again, and there's someone behind you.
Please identify yourself.
>> MELANIE HUMPHREY SONNTAG: Melanie Humphrey Sonntag,
from Chicago. Rise to speak in favor of the motion. I think
it's an excellent idea. A few years ago NCRA started doing a
firm owner's economic benchmark survey among our firm owner
members. That survey is conducted very anonymously. And it
provides maybe not priceless information but very useful
information for many of us to continue doing our work across
the country. I think this is a brilliant idea. I think it
provides hard data which schools can rely upon and which our
members can use as a benchmark for themselves. With the firm
owner's survey, it's broken up into geographic areas which
helps me figure out if I want to relocate my business or see 
how well I'm doing in the area that I'm in. I think this is
an excellent motion. Thank you.
>> TORI PITTMAN: Good morning, Madame President. Tori
Pittman, North Carolina. I speak in favor of this particular
motion because of the status of our current officials in
North Carolina. They are under attack by our legislature,
and there is currently an effort underway to do such a
survey. And this information would go a long way to helping
our official court reporters make an argument for their case
and why they need to be kept in the court and how actually
cost efficient they are when compared to the court reporters
in the free market. Thank you.
>> TAMI KEENAN: I'm going to ask that our CEO and Chief
Executive Director address the issue.
>> JIM CUDAHY: I'd like to be less formal normally than
what we have in a business meeting. And Linda, I would be
more than happy to talk with you about this offline. It's
common for associations to do compensation surveys. And, as
you described, it could be done and it could be done at low
cost. We do need to think about some of the implications
that Rick mentioned. But it's -- I'd prefer that we bring it
up as a proposal that we could think about at the staff
level, how we would execute on it and then take it to the
board of directors for consideration. It certainly has
merits for all the reasons that I heard Tori and Melanie and
you talk about. And I do think it would be something that
would be of interest to the members. But we do have to think
about legal implications, how it's done and so forth. But --
and you know, I do think that you hear numbers reported from
the Department of Labor and otherwise that don't always seem
to reflect what actually is going on. So I think it's -- I
think it's a idea with serious merit. But we've got to look
at it from all angles. With the motion out there, I don't
know how we handle this. But -- I would love to talk to you
more about it during the convention.
>> AUDIENCE: My name is Adam Alweis from Syracuse, New
York. I would side with Rick on his position. I don't see a
reason for this at all. I think you're opening up a huge can
of worms by going into people's personal finances as to what
they make every year. Then you have state versus state and
who knows where it will end.
>> TAMI KEENAN: Stand at ease, please.
>> TAMI KEENAN: I'm going to ask our Parliamentarian to
address the assembly.
>> NANCY SYLVESTER: It is more appropriate for the
assembly to be requesting this of the board instead of for
the assembly to be directing the board. Because of the 
board's -- because of what the board's responsibilities are
in your bylaws. So it is my recommendation and legal
counsel's recommendation that we change the wording of the
motion to begin with that "We recommend to the board of
directors." So "We recommend to the board of directors that
NCRA conduct a survey ..." with the rest of it. And what I
need -- what the chair will need to know is there any
objection with making that change?
>> TAMI KEENAN: Is there any objection to making that
change? I see no objection. Then that's what it will state.
Any further discussion? I will reread the motion again.
>> AUDIENCE: You didn't memorize that?
>> I did.
>> TAMI KEENAN: He wants to make sure everyone else did.
Okay. They want me to reread it.
>> MAE PITTMAN: I have a final comment if there are no
other comments or debate.
>> TAMI KEENAN: Are there any other comments by any --
>> MAE PITTMAN: I'd like to hear the motion before I
decide that.
>> TAMI KEENAN: Okay. I'm going to reread the motion.
NCRA recommends to the board that they -- that NCRA conduct a
secure online survey of its members to collect information on
the income from court reporting, CART, and broadcast
captioning to be reviewed and disseminated to board members,
staff, and state leaders on or before the 2014 NCRA
convention and expo.
If you want --
>> You said, "NCRA recommends."
>> JEFF ALTMAN: That should be maybe just passes that --
it is recommended that.
>> TAMI KEENAN: It is recommended that NCRA conduct. I'm
sorry.
>> JEFF ALTMAN: Recommend NCRA board of directors.
>> TAMI KEENAN: Did you get that? Would you please
identify yourself?
>> MAE PITTMAN: I'm Mae Pittman from Chicago. At an
appropriate time, I'd like to ask for consideration of an
amendment.
>> TAMI KEENAN: This would be an appropriate time.
>> MAY PITTMAN: I would like to inserted or insert into
the motion two words after income "and expenses."
>> TAMI KEENAN: Is there a second on that amendment?
Hearing no second, the motion fails for lack of a second.
So we continue to discuss the motion as originally -- as
read. Is there any discussion from anyone who has not
spoken? 
>> ED VARALLO: Ed Varallo from Boston. Speaking to the
amendment, I don't think we need the amendment because income
--
>> TAMI KEENAN: The amendment has already -- are you
talking about in relation to the amendment on income and
expenses?
>> ED VARALLO: I thought that was discussion on that
amendment.
>> TAMI KEENAN: That was not seconded. That amendment
did not pass.
Is there any more discussion by anyone on the discussion
as read? Okay. Linda.
>> LINDA HALLWORTH: Thank you, madam chair. The reason
for this proposed motion is that it was a key part of our
discussions yesterday as state leaders, leaving in the adage
that information is power, this is part of the tools in the
toolkit that state leaders need in order to combat all of the
various attacks on our industry state by state and to use
that information cohesively to combat national efforts and
local efforts to reduce salaries by court administrators, et
cetera. And also to provide guidelines and additional
information that individual members and state leaders can use
for their membership purposes. Thank you.
Is there any further discussion? Are you ready for the
vote? I'm going to ask you to use your blue cards to vote.
All those in favor of the motion please raise your blue card?
Please put them down. All those opposed, please raise your
blue card. Stand at ease, please. The chair is in doubt as
to the number. So we're going to do a seriatum vote process.
All those in favor please stand and raise your blue card.
And starting to my left in the first row, say number one and
as you count off, sit down. (Counting off) 39.
>> TAMI KEENAN: All those opposed, please stand, raise
your blue card and we'll do the same process. Doug.
(Counting off).
>> TAMI KEENAN: Wait, wait, we're at 17 with Doreen.
(Continuing counting off)
28.
>> JIM CUDAHY: Can I make a comment real quick? Okay.
>> TAMI KEENAN: There are 39 in the affirmative, 28 in
the negative. There is a majority in the affirmative, and
the motion is adopted. The body has requested that the NCRA
board of directors conduct a survey -- consider -- I don't
have "consider" in this motion. Stand at ease. That the --
NCRA board of directors consider conducting a survey. The --
>> LINDA HALLWORTH: Madam chair, can I request that the
original motion be read back to the membership?
>> TAMI KEENAN: Come to the microphone again. Do you
want the motion that you read before we changed it read or
the one that they voted down?
>> LINDA HALLWORTH: There was a recommendation by the
parliamentarian and I would like that agreed to changed to
the wording read back which I do --
>> TAMI KEENAN: That's the one.
>> LINDA HALLWORTH: I do not believe that that said
"consider." It said a recommendation to the board to, not
consider to. It was an action, not a thought.
>> TAMI KEENAN: I will read the motion as adopted.
Whether "consider" is in there or not, the motion that was
passed said "recommend."
>> LINDA HALLWORTH: Recommend to, not recommend to
consider. It's a big, big difference with that one word.
>> TAMI KEENAN: The motion that was voted on and passed
is It is recommended that the -- "It is recommended to the
Board of Directors that NCRA conduct a secure online survey
of its members to collect information on the income from
court reporting, CART, and broadcast captioning to be
reviewed and disseminated to board members, staff and state
leaders on or before the 2014 NCRA convention and expo."
>> LINDA HALLWORTH: Yes.
>> TAMI KEENAN: That is the motion that passed.
>> JEFF ALTMAN: A legal point that we're talking about
here is the authority of the assembled members and the
authority of the board of directors. It would be unusual for
the membership to be making operational decisions on things
that should be done. Those actions are within the authority
of the board of directors. So this group has voted that the
board address the subject, which it will. And then if this
group doesn't like the decision of the board of directors
there's procedures to come back and review that but the first
action has to be by the board which is why we've sort of gone
through this. And it's going to be have to be reviewed by
staff and the board anyway. So I think we've reached the
right conclusion. But that's the legal point in addition to
the parliamentary point. You've just elected a board of
directors to lead your organization. So let them do this.
>> TAMI KEENAN: Our executive director wishes to address,
too.
>> JIM CUDAHY: Tongue in cheek here. However, if we're
going to do a survey of numbers, I hope we do better than we
did with numbering off the vote.
(Laughter)
>> TAMI KEENAN: If I'd known he wanted to poke fun at us,
I might not have let him speak. 
Is there any other new business? Please come to the
microphone and identify yourself.
>> JENNIFER LEACH: Good morning. My name is Jennifer
Leach from Trinidad and Tobago. I take this opportunity to
say to this meeting that my first NCRA convention was back in
1991 in New York. And at that time, there would have been
significantly more people in attendance. As I don't recall
whether I became a member then, but I have been a member for
some considerable time. And I have communicated, and I have
tried to contribute to the organization. I'm making the
observation today only that for the Caribbean, there are very
few attempts made to address any concerns. I have personally
contacted NCRA on several issues over my tenure as a member.
And on no occasion have I had an acknowledgment of any of the
contributions I've made.
The most recent being that I think sometime last year I
noted in our JCR that there was the acceptance of a Trinidad
and Tobago court reporter's association. I did not know who
were the members, who the executive was. There was
absolutely and certainly an amount of people with whom I
interact. By the way, I now manage the -- I'm the manager of
court reporting services for the Trinidad and Tobago. I have
worked in Barbados. I've had communication with Jamaica and
at the Bahamas. So I'm saying this while I'm Trinidadian.
I'm talking about a group of people if we were an
organization to reach out to the Caribbean, you might find
that you have significantly more participants. There are
several who are here on this occasion, I know; but we really
need to be making an effort. But let me go back to the
Trinidad and Tobago court reporter's association. I wrote an
e-mail saying can I please be enlightened as to the
procedure. Up to now, I have not had acknowledgment of my
e-mail. I treasure my membership and this organization. I
hope that the new team, the new executive would take note of
my comments here today.
>> TAMI KEENAN: Thank you very much. The chair
recognizes Mr. Cudahy.
>> JIM CUDAHY: Thank you for bringing that to our
attention. I am not certain whom you directed an e-mail.
But I would be more than happy -- happy personally to talk
with you about the issues that you raised. I also direct you
to the back of the room. Adam, raise your hand. Adam
Finkel, who tends to be the person who works with our state
associations more than anyone else on staff. I invite you to
talk with Adam as well. But please track me down during the
convention and let's talk.
>> TAMI KEENAN: Is there any other new business? Okay.
According to Article IX of the constitution and bylaws.
>> AUDIENCE: (Inaudible) (off mic).
>> TAMI KEENAN: If you didn't hear her, she said my court
reporting mother would like to speak. The chair recognizes
Patricia Hyland from Michigan.
>> PATRICIA HYLAND: I know there's a new way of doing the
CEU gathering. Could you just explain why we're going to
start doing it this way?
>> TAMI KEENAN: Okay. I'm going to ask Mr. Cudahy to
explain it. Wait. Jim, excuse me, excuse me. Marlana, was
it about that or something else?
>> AUDIENCE: It is about that. Marlana Haig, Indiana.
For those who are able to attend the NCSA meeting this
afternoon from 2:00 to 6:00, it is a topic of discussion.
We're bringing the state leaders together to decide what is
the best way to do that because there have been several
comments made that it's difficult. We do have an idea. But
we'd also like to gather the thought of all the other state
leaders, and we'll be disseminating that information to
anyone who handles conventions. So, hopefully, that will be
helpful to all the state associations and anyone who deals
with planning a convention.
>> TAMI KEENAN: Thank you, Marlana. And I think Pat is
probably also asking also about how we're going to collect
CEU points at this convention, correct? I'm going to ask Jim
to speak on that.
>> JIM CUDAHY: You're asking how, but you're asking about
rationale?
>> Kind of both.
>> JIM CUDAHY: Okay. So people register for whatever
they register for the convention when one day, two day, three
day. By virtue of picking up their packages, they have to
pick up their packages on-site in order to get CEUs. This is
how it works from other events we've done, state owners and
others, associations that way. There's an honor system that
we're expecting people to adhere to. Part of the rationale
is just because you're sitting in a room doesn't mean you're
listening. So we're asking people to be adults. We're
asking people to have -- to answer to a code of ethics. So
as our thought that we will try this. Now, if we do this and
the room's half empty on Sunday morning, then we'll have to
rethink it. But it hasn't been our experience that that's
been an issue at other events where we've used this. It's --
this is common practice within association world and
including at the American Society of Association Executives
to which many NCRA staff answer and we earn points toward our
own certification. And it is something that is -- meets the 
approval of the accrediting bodies that oversee our
certification programs.
>> PATRICIA HYLAND: One more thing. I would have liked
to have gotten a little earlier notice about downloading
materials for seminars that you want to attend. I was
already here. There was no way I was going to be able to go
and print it because it came out at 8:35 yesterday. At least
the one that I received about the paper lite. It's in the
program. So, obviously, you knew it was going to be done
ahead of time. So, if we'd been told last week maybe. Just
a little prior notice.
>> TAMI KEENAN: Jim's going to address that.
>> JIM CUDAHY: We're subject to when we receive materials
from speakers.
>> PATRICIA HYLAND: I know that's part of the problem,
absolutely.
>> JIM CUDAHY: I can't say I know the specifics of when
things arrived and that sort of thing. But we do rely on
volunteers to deliver most of the education onsite, and even
when they're not, people tend to do things last minute and
make tweaks and so forth. So it's -- I hear what you're
saying. We will endeavor to do that. But human nature being
human nature, people are going to do things last minute. And
we, obviously, can't allow you to download something we
haven't yet received. But I hear what you're saying.
>> PATRICIA HYLAND: I figured that was a biggie.
>> TAMI KEENAN: Any other new business?
According to Article IX (9) of the Constitution and
Bylaws, voting for constitution and bylaws amendments shall
be by electronic means.
All eligible voting members for whom NCRA has an active
e-mail address will receive an e-mail within two hours of the
close of this business meeting. The e-mail will contain a
link to the secure voting Website. At the secure Website, you
will be asked to enter in your NCRA ID number followed by
your NCRA Online password. Once logged in, Members enter the
secure voting Website and vote.
Online voting will be open for 12 hours and will open
within 2 hours of this meeting.
Members attending the convention will be able to vote via
their own computers and there will also be voting computers
in the Ryman Exhibit Hall Foyer for the length of the 12-hour
voting window.
The results shall be posted on the NCRA Web site as soon
as available.
The chair requests that President-Elect Nancy Varallo of
Worcester, Massachusetts, please join me at the podium.
>> NANCY VARALLO: I'm ready.
>> TAMI KEENAN: I just asked her if she was ready. I
remember how I felt last year and how I looked at Doug and
that he would be here to help me. But I also knew he was
turning over the reins, I believe he thought, to a capable
person. So it is with great honor, I stand here knowing that
I'm passing this gavel to a very capable person who is ready
for this. But I'm here for you.
>> NANCY VARALLO: I know you are. Thank you.
>> TAMI KEENAN: It is indeed my pleasure to formally hand
over the NCRA presidential gavel as you begin your journey as
president of NCRA.
(Applause.)
>> The NCRA Board of Directors and the Chair appreciates
your participation in our Annual Business Meeting, both in
person and via our streaming text made possible by the fine
CART providers of Caption First.
If there is no further business and no objection, we will
adjourn.
Hearing no objection, the 2013 Annual Business Meeting of
the National Court Reporters Association is adjourned sine
die.
(Applause)
We'll see you at the NCSA meeting at 2:00 p.m. and then
again at the Opening Reception this evening at 6:30 p.m. with
the Only New Once Reception starting at 6:00 p.m.
Thank you.
(Applause).
>> Meeting concluded at 9:59 a.m. CT.